# OIT Simplifies Access to VistA and CPRS

https://vaww.oit.va.gov/oit-simplifies-access-to-vista-and-cprs/

June 25, 2020|Categories: IT Matters|Tags: telehealth, vista, webvram

As COVID-19 has spread and affected thousands of Americans, including Veterans, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has worked to simplify processes for VA clinicians by streamlining VA health care providers’ access to the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA) and Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS)—VA’s health record systems. VA’s Office of Information and Technology recently expanded the use of Web VistA Remote Access Management (WebVRAM) among VA’s health providers and others in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) so that providers and staff can now easily navigate multiple separate CPRS and VistA systems without having to sign in separately to each system. Before the pandemic, the main use case for the creation of the WebVRAM application was to help staff in tele-critical care units, who often have multiple CPRS sessions open. Prior to the application’s release, if a tele-critical care staff member was working on a case in a one CPRS session for an extended period, the other open CPRS sessions might time out. By nearly doubling users with streamlined access through this cloud-hosted application, OIT helped providers spend more time with patients and less time logging into systems and successfully completed one of VHA’s seven telehealth IT priorities in response to the pandemic.

One way to visualize how this new process works is by imagining that you are fixing a car. While working on this car, you need to use a variety of tools to address different issues. But each time you must access a tool in your toolbox, you are required to unlock the toolbox, open it, replace your current tool, then select your new tool. Now imagine you can simply keep the toolbox open and freely swap out tools as needed. This improves your efficiency and allows you to focus on the task rather than the process of accessing your tools. In the case of WebVRAM, accessing VistA/CPRS systems with a streamlined sign on is like keeping the toolbox open and quickly swapping tools out as needed instead of tediously signing into each individual system.

As telehealth requirements surged over the past several months, OIT quickly ramped up WebVRAM access for VA clinicians—increasing the number of users by 450% from 963 to 5,292 health care providers from late March to early June. Additionally, OIT introduced a CPRS Launcher desktop icon that allows users to continue to work if the WebVRAM application experiences downtime. Based on the estimated two minutes saved when a user now accesses CPRS, the time savings translate to 9,600 additional 30-minute visits with patients per year—allowing more patients to receive care. But expanding WebVRAM use is not the only way VA is improving telehealth access. Thanks to OIT’s work quintupling capacity of VA’s telehealth video conferencing system, VA Video Connect, VHA can now host nearly 16,000 concurrent video telehealth sessions.

As COVID-19 highlighted, access to health care is one of the most important parts of life. VA leaders and staff know that and are working every day to make sure that those who need health care have access whenever they need it, wherever they are. Because VA enabled WebVRAM for thousands of clinicians, those providers can spend more uninterrupted time caring for their Veteran patients.
